\frontmatter 
\chapter{Abstract}

[Revision 3]
- improved background and problem
- rewrote methodology
- rewrote contributions

*Background and Problem:* A crisis is a sequence of alarming events that put groups of people in danger. It can ultimately lead to a disaster (e.g. an hurricane or a nuclear explosion) provoking huge damages and loss of human lives. Crisis management work entails a set of inter-organisational activities, to provide help to the communities struck by a crisis. Continuous training for preparedness enables crisis workers (e.g. firefighters, paramedics, managers) to achieve better performances and commitment to the job. To achieve those goals the body of research in reflective learning provide theoretical tools to guide data-driven, collaborative reflection on work experiences towards changes in behaviour. ICT support for reflective learning facilitates the process by providing user interfaces for capturing work experiences, visualising discrepancies as reflection triggers; and by supporting sharing of learning outcomes. Yet current IT tools don’t consider the very specific, situated nature of crisis work. While data capturing tools lack interaction paradigms suitable for being used in-action, visualisation tools struggle in providing the user with context information needed to ground reflection on-action and achieve structured learning outcomes that can be easily shared among colleagues.

*Goal:* The research in this thesis is based on the assumption that theory in the field of embodied and sensing-baed interaction can inform the design of computer interfaces to better assist reflection processes in the specific case of crisis training. This thesis explores how conceptual tools from reflective learning theory can be implemented in technology tools to make the capture of work experiences lightweight and pervasive, and interaction with reflection-useful information tangible, situated and playful.

*Method:* The work was grounded on design science methodology. Six field studies have been performed during large physical simulations of crisis work. Exploratory studies drove the design and production of eight prototypes of sensing-based interfaces. Software and hardware rapid prototyping techniques, opens source tools and digital manufacturing have been largely employed. Prototypes were eventually returned to the field and tested against acceptance, usability and impact on learning. Results from evaluations were used to validate existing theories and in the development of new constructs. New application domain for the use of the technology have been investigated during academic visits at City London University and MIT. Commercial exploitation of research outcomes are being discussed.

*Contributions:* The resulting contributions add new knowledge to guide the design of novel sensing-based interfaces to support continuous training of crisis workers. To this end it is demonstrated how conceptual tools from reflective learning theory can be mapped to technology to support the *capture*, *re-creation* and *generation* of crisis work experiences. Seven challenges to drive the design of experience-capturing tools are provided. The challenges shed light on *what* information is relevant and *how* to capture relevant information and they were explored with the production of wearable data capturing tool prototypes. Further, the thesis contributes with novel paradigms derived from sensing-based interaction. The paradigms have been implemented in embodied user interfaces to reduce distraction while *capturing* experiences during work, to allow for *re-creating* past experiences being situated in a physical context that provide prompts for reflection; and to allow *generating* engaging and collaborative work experiences by means of serious games. Building prototypes of such user interfaces requires a wide range of competences ranging from digital manufacturing to software and hardware engineering. Lessons learnt from the author’s experience provide knowledge for the creation of toolkits to ease rapid prototyping sensing-based interaction.