
# Contributions 

The contributions of this PhD work are presented according to four areas. Contributions 1 maps theory with case studies, contribution 2 provide design challenges for the technology, contribution 3 produced the design of interaction techniques functional to the case studies. Finally contribution 4 shades the light on challenges in building prototypes to implement the design. 

1. Implementation and evaluation of the CSRL theory model into a set of applications of technology
2. Understanding of the challenges in designing data capturing tools for crisis workers 
3. Development of novel interaction techniques to support crisis training
4. Understanding of the challenges in building prototypes to be used during simulated crisis work

Contribution 1 of the thesis comprises new knowledge about how theoretical concepts in the CSRL model can be mapped to technologies and implemented in tools. The work provided successful case studies that constitute an empirical evaluation of the model in the field of crisis training. 

The CSRL model developed by Krogstie et al. [-@Krogstie:fo] and summarised in Chapter X presents a cycle of four stages to conceptualise reflection at work. For each stage a set of reflection-useful activities that can be enhanced by technology are presented. During this PhD work two of the four stages of the model,*plan and do work* and *conduct reflection session*, have been instantiated and specific activities from each stage have been supported by technology tools (Figure X). 

During *plan and do work* the *monitor work* and *do work* activities have been supported. The *monitor work* activity has been implemented by WATCHiT (P3) which empowers workers for capturing a wide spectrum of qualitative and quantitative data. I found out that **wearable sensors technology and embodied user interfaces** provided the best design choice for the crisis domain. The *do work* activity has been supported by Don’t Panic (PX) by generating realistic work experiences that push workers towards taking actions typical of work under stress. Although the *do work* phase in the model describes real work activities, for the specific case of crisis management we claim it can also be applied to simulated work. Indeed, I [or we?!] found out that the innovative **digital board game technology** presented in PX was effective in recreating stress condition similar to real work and collaboration affordances typical tho the ones observed in real work in a decision room. 

During *Conduct reflection session* CroMAR (P1) supports a wide range of activities. First it makes *related experiences available* by aggregating data about work performed by colleagues (captured by WATCHiT) and automatic sensors. Then CroMAR allows to visualise data while being situated in a physical context that helps *reconstruct or envision work experiences*. By allowing layering and filtering of data according to source, time and space it facilitates *understand and articulate meanings*. Finally an embedded the text editor allows for the collection and sharing of lesson learnt and to elaborate a *plan to apply reflection outcomes*. We found out that **mobile augmented reality technology** is efficient in supporting debriefing and reflection after crisis work.

Contribution 1 can be a resource for researcher in the field of computer supported reflection that strives in finding solutions  to map theory tools to technology tools that people can use at work. [Although application developed were tailored to the crisis training domain, they could be repurposed to other domains. The need for pervasive data collection and disruption-free interfaces is shared by many work practices; the digital board game approach developed in PX has been proven to be a tool also in generating realistic work experiences for the dementia care domain [tesiAnja]. Finally we demonstrated a new application domain for mobile augmented reality technology: to support debriefing. CroMAR, the tool we developed, could be adapted to support debriefing of work practices that share share  similarities with the crisis domain.] The presented application of technology constitute an empirical evaluation of theory which outcomes (P2,P7) can inform future development of the CSRL model.